been struggling to find motivation and a
reason to live in a world where free
will doesn't exist
before we get into the rational and
philosophical side
of this conflict between two
irreconcilable worldviews
let's all acknowledge that there's a
really important
emotional side to the dispute that in
large part when we talk about
determinism
we are not talking about something that
people know
but something that they feel something
that they care about
and they may not have questioned
themselves why it is
they care about this what it means to
them
or what the ethical and moral
implications are for their own life
in this way i would compare the
philosophy of determinism
to the buddhist belief in karma
and reincarnation there are many many
buddhists
who will admit to you they have no
evidence
to prove that reincarnation is real
many determinists will admit that there
isn't evidence
for the philosophy or theory of
determinism
but buddhists will tell you they choose
to believe in karma
they choose to believe in reincarnation
because of
the emotional impact this has in their
lives and it's very easy
to imagine if you were certain
that you would be reincarnated and have
another life as another person
you might be much more willing to engage
in
suicidal acts of heroism
to throw yourself into battle to throw
yourself into life to take risks
and specifically the delusion within
buddhism is that as long as you're
getting good karma as long as you're
doing something morally positive
your next reincarnation is going to be
going to be even better so not leading
to a reckless life of self-indulgence
but sure a reckless life of heroism it's
very easy to see the uh the effect that
could have on
someone's life people do say
that believing in determinism
changes the way they feel changes the
way they regard their life
some feel that it's liberating and
uplifting
i've had people who believe in
determinism tell me that it was only
when they understood determinism
that they really let go of their sense
of hostility towards drug addicts
pedophiles and other serious criminals
that they accepted this world view
that nobody really makes their own
decisions that nobody has control of
their own actions
that even if you can choose what you do
you don't choose what you desire you
don't choose what you want
this fundamentally passive worldview
suddenly even the worst criminal such as
a drug addict or a pedophile rapist
instead of being a perpetrator they also
are somehow a passive victim in this
universe where
all of our actions are determined by
someone other than ourselves
and other people who believe in
determinism
i have heard it said that they find it
very demotivating
and demoralizing now that they've lost
this sense of
choice and originality because they've
subscribed so this is a philosophy this
is something people choose to believe in
in part because of how it makes them
feel
in struggling to find motivation and a
reason to live in a world where free
will doesn't exist
i'm sure when you discovered that free
will is an illusion you must have had a
similar experience so how do you deal
with that well
this is quite a popular question right i
get asked this quite a lot and it's
quite a serious one if it's really
troubling you to the extent that you're
struggling to find meaning in life
it's not in a shallow or catty sense
that i say this is similar
to mythology people choose to believe in
karma
they choose to believe in buddhism
without evidence
and not because it has problem-solving
value
right but because of how it makes them
feel
because of some kind of ethical impact
on their lives around the world whether
they experience that as uplifting or
depressing
uh liberating or constraining whatever
it may be you know
i just want to add not everything in the
sciences
involves things we can empirically
observe things we can
verify empirically however
both in the sciences and in philosophy
we have to keep in mind this criterion
of problem solving
right what is the problem
that determinism is supposed to solve
there is a theory right now that our
solar system
has an extra planet some people call it
the dark
planet that there's a planet so far from
the sun
that we can't see it at all with
telescopes we can't
we can't detect its existence now
why does this theory exist when people
do complex mathematical computations to
measure
what are now the stable regular orbits
of each of the planets around the sun
and i think also they include some of
the
asteroids and other large objects right
when they calculate the motion
of our the planets around the sun and
our solar system the gravity
of each planet acts on the others like
the precise
course and shape of the orbit of a huge
planet like jupiter
it influences and is influenced by the
other planets
and looking at these equations there
seems to be an irregularity
or an imperfection and the math
would look better the equations would be
improved it would all become more
consistent
if we added another planet that we can't
see
that's compensating for some of those
motions that evens out
some of those some of those numbers so
this is starting with a problem
and then it's proposing a theory for the
purposes
of problem solving and now as you can
imagine there are people who want to
send out
a probe to test the theory of whether or
not there is
another planet that we can't see now
admittedly it will affect life on earth
very little if we discover this planet
the planet is not going to be inhabited
by intelligent
beings it probably the planet is not
going to contain
valuable minerals that will want to go
and mine or anything like this
i mean probably will just be an
interesting footnote in history that
there was this other planet
that nobody could see and then we sent a
probe and it's good that's that's one
possibility
right but why does the discussion matter
why why do we philosophize about this
though why do we theorize about it why
do we speculate about it
why is this in the realm of science
right
because there are other possibilities
right another possibility is
that there is no extra planet there is
no undiscovered world
that instead there's a problem with how
we do the math now
right and we'd also be interested in
discovering that
we would also have a sincere interest in
having a better understanding of what we
may be doing wrong
in writing out the equations in the
first place that lead us to this
hypothesis that there could be
another planet influencing the orbits
maybe there's something we don't
understand about gravity
understand about the theory on the
chalkboard and we're actually open to
that
and interested in that this type of
problem-solving mentality
is completely absent from the discourse
about determinism the way determinism is
presented the way determinism is
believed in
and the sense of smug intellectual
superiority
that believers have over non-believers
strikingly strikingly this is similar
to the role of mythology in religion one
of the most interesting things about the
psychology of free will to me is that
it's
impossible to not kind of live with that
illusion that you do have free will i
mean
i can fully rationalize the idea that
free will is ultimately
an illusion but it still feels like i
have it interestingly i think that if
you ask someone who believes in free
will probably needs to be an atheist for
this to be
reliably the case but if you ask them
what they think
brings the meaning life you know what is
it that infuses their life with meaning
they'll probably say something like well
i like pursuing pleasures you know the
pursuit of happiness is one of the
things detailed in the declaration of
independence for a reason because it's
seen as one of the most
important ways in which a human being
can find meaning and purpose in life
and the anti-free will argument doesn't
remove that it further entrenches it
what determinists will do again and
again and again
is present you with irrelevant
preconditions as if they are causes
that determine human behavior human
thoughts human emotions
uh etc human imagination now we can all
accept
there are very rarely very occasionally
in life
determining causes for our actions that
override our own mind our own
nervous system you could be shocked with
electricity
and that causes your hand to seize up
and
in theory someone holding a gun who gets
electrocuted
might be able to really say in court
look they didn't choose
like they didn't decide to pull the
trigger they were shocked with
electricity
and then their nervous system seized up
there are very real court cases talking
about the extent to where someone may or
may not
be responsible for the decision they
made because the effects of a drug
drug that causes them to hallucinate or
changes their behavior or causes
mania or what have you um we all
acknowledge there are some very limited
situations in life where we are talking
about human behavior
human thoughts human decisions being
determined
by something or someone other than that
that person themselves in establishing
something as a
necessary precondition we have not
established it as a cause there are
exceptions
to the rule i'm explaining to you here
and i think those exceptions
only draw attention to just how absurd
the determinist
philosophy really is a man who is
standing in the middle
of a field holding a rifle may be able
to say
sincerely that he was struck by
lightning
and the lightning was the cause
of his pulling the trigger the
electricity flowed through his body
his muscles suddenly seized up he pulled
the trigger
not of his own volition not of his own
choosing not with his own will
mentation imagination intention no
there was an external cause there was a
cause and effect
relationship between that lightning
strike him and what he did next
what's so absurd about the determinist
worldview
is that they want us to believe that all
of our actions are in this way
caused by the external world and they
will indicate preconditions
again and again and again as if they
were
causes it is true that
to become a drug addict you must live in
a society
where those drugs are available for sale
it would be impossible for you to become
a cocaine addict
if you happen to be living on a remote
island where cocaine just didn't exist
it wasn't grown there it wasn't exported
there this is true if you were living in
a society
where there were no opiates you could
not become
an opiate addict but it's a tremendous
fallacious and ultimately immoral step
to taking your reasoning to then insist
that you are no more responsible for the
decisions
that made you into a drug addict then
the man
standing in a rainy field is responsible
for pulling the trigger on the gun
when he was struck by lightning whether
you think of this in terms of
sociological conditions that made you
become a drug addict
being raised in poverty in a
neighborhood where drugs are commonly
bought and sold
or if you think about this in terms of
psychological preconditions oh
you were a victim of childhood trauma
and this
quote unquote caused you to become a
jordan no
we can never take this step from
precondition
to cause and effect mechanistic
relationship the human mind
never operates the way salt forming into
salt crystals operates
simply in response to external
conditions
and the implicit laws of physics
unfolding for us
unless and except we're dealing with
these extreme
exceptions to the rule if you have ever
been electrocuted
you might know what it feels like to
have your hand
clench up due to an electric shock and
you
feel you know the difference between
choosing to open or close your own hand
and when that happens
without your will contrary to will
because it is in this sense
determined that is the philosophy that
is the fetish
of determinism is that in this surreal
sense
all of us secretly are marionettes
with no evidence to support it and
plenty of evidence to the contrary the
whole discourse
about determinism is vitiated by
fallacious reasoning these fallacies are
so deep and so profound that i can say i
reject both determinism and free will
free will and as much as it's an
argument created and counter posed
to determinism what is randomness
how do we perceive it empirically
the judgment that something is random or
not random
is entirely a judgment having to do with
our own perception
and our own feeling it isn't the
observation
of an actually existing law of physics
in the universe so determinist will
accept this first step of the argument
if you say that rolling the dice is
random the outcome of rolling a set of
dice is random
what you are really saying is we cannot
know
or we do not know or we do not care
about the incredibly minut causes and
effects
that actually control which side of the
dice
will turn up when we roll the dice this
is a judgment
about no ability right it's an
epistemological judgment
it's a judgment about what we know or
even what we care
to know we say this is random this is
arbitrary this is meaningless
right our concept of randomness is
reciprocal with
our judgment that something is
meaningless really
this is just a judgment that we either
don't know or we don't even
care to know like if it could be
ascertained precisely what caused
one dice to come up as a six and the
other to come as a three
we wouldn't want to figure it out anyway
so we discard this
from the realm of possible human
knowledge
by reviling it as random
what if i told you my grandmother
died in a random car accident
what does that mean what does that mean
does it does it really mean
that the causes of the car accident are
unknown
or unknowable does it mean that the
scientific research you'd have to do is
on this kind of
minute scale of measuring the factors
that control which side of the dice
rolls up no no it's really all i'm
telling you is my own attitude
now let's say somebody comes forward and
talks to me who knew my grandmother
and they say look you know they know the
reason
why that car accident happened and there
was ice on the road
and my grandmother was ripped off by a
uh
a corrupt garage that there were workmen
in a garage
who said they were going to change her
tires for this other pair of better
tires but they ripped her off and they
gave her really bad snow tires
and that's why she died right that it
wasn't random
that there were these factors that i
should not regard as random
now you could you could still regard
this as random you could say well
the weather the climate it's random some
days there's ice on the road sometimes
there isn't i regard this as random i
don't care
it's just a judgment of whether or not
well you know some people who work in
automotive repair shops are corrupt and
some aren't randomly
she went to buy new snow tires to pay
someone to rotate her tires replace her
tires
and she happened to get a bad pair of
tires or she happened to get a bad
mechanic
who dishonest gifted i could still
regard that as random and it's really
just an emotional commitment
if i say no this matters i care i
if i get motivated i have to get to the
bottom of this i have to sue this guy i
have to charge him with a crime or take
him to court and say hey
you are responsible or partly
responsible for my grandmother dying in
this car accident it wasn't at random
i'm assigning responsibility do you see
the problem
the distinction between what's random
and not random
it's not the perception of some kind of
verifiably real law of physics in the
universe
like gravity it's a judgment about me
it's a judgment about how i perceive the
universe it's a judgment even about my
moral and ethical values what if your
grandmother
died in a car accident and you had been
told
all your life since childhood
that it was at random that it was
meaningless that just randomly
she happened to be killed in a car
accident
and then someone comes forward to you
and presents you with a dossier
from moscow and they say hey you know
what the russians
disclose this information because 50
years had elapsed
since the car accident it was
declassified and in fact
your grandmother was intentionally
killed by a kgb
agent by a russian spy that there was a
spy on a mission
and let's say the spy was sent to kill
someone
on a particular highway driving a
particular kind of car and they got the
wrong person
so in a sense it was random your
grandmother was killed
at random in the sense that
it was just an accident that this spy
killed the wrong person
it just just happened to be that your
grandmother was driving the same type of
car
and let's say the same color of car as
the person the russian agent was
actually supposed to target and
assassinate
right so it's it's still kind of random
but now maybe how you feel about it has
changed
you no longer regard this as random in
the same sense
as happening to meet a drunk driver on
the highway
is that random is it not random as
happening to drive down a highway where
someone spilled oil
on the road causing the accident as
as happening to have an accident that
you and i would
judge to be random it's our judgment
we're talking about we're not perceiving
something in the outside world
in an objectively real falsifiable
scientific sense
as either random or non-random when we
make
judgments about randomness we're making
judgments
about the limits of human knowledge and
even an emotional
and ethical judgment about the extent to
which we care
if you invest this with meaning if you
say wow this is terrible now i'm
motivated now i'm going to go
and do the research i'm going to go to
moscow and read the files and i'm going
to try to figure out what really
happened what was really going on with
my grandmother being assassinated
you can do that and this does not in any
way
make her death more or less random our
sense of randomness
is in the shadow of our sense of meaning
and meaninglessness and the meaning of
life is something you create it's
something you
invest in you project onto
these arbitrary circumstances the
determinist
worldview is created from this strange
yearning of people to want to believe
that the decision you made when you
chose what book to read next
and the decision you made when in your
own mind's eye you decided
whether or not this was a good book
whether or not it was meaningful
whether or not it was convincing whether
or not you should change your whole life
in response to what this book has been
telling you or teaching you
that all of that happens in the same
simplistic
mechanistic sense as salt forming
into salt crystals and they want you to
believe this
with absolutely no empirical evidence to
support it
and a great deal of empirical evidence
in the real world to the contrary the
question i'm asking you is
why and i think the answer is what i
said at the beginning
of this video people choose to believe
this unbelievable thing
for the same reason that they embrace
various kinds of religious mythology
because it has a certain sort
of ethical and moral impact on them
it changes how they feel about their own
lives
to close the video i just want to say
i've had
a determinist or two say to me that
believing in determinism
let them forgive other human beings
because they regarded those human beings
as not truly responsible for their own
actions not responsible for
their own desires for their own evils
what if christianity had that same
effect on you
what if buddhism the belief in karma
what if hinduism
the belief in fate and hindu
what if some other religion or some
other myth
had this supposedly positive affecting
you
is that all it takes is that all it
takes for you
to be willing to believe a lie and now
to sit here
and insist to me that it's science